### Day 1
* [Installing Java](#installing-java)
* [Java fundamentals](#java-fundamentals)
* [Hello World](#hello-world)

#### Installing Java
* [for Ubuntu](#for-ubuntu)
* [for Windows](#for-windows)
* [for Macs](#for-macs)

##### For Ubuntu
1. Check if you already have `java` installed
    * Go to your terminal
    * Type `java -version`
    * If you get an output like `java version "1.8.0_65"
Java(TM) SE Runtime Environment (build 1.8.0_65-b17)
Java HotSpot(TM) 64-Bit Server VM (build 25.65-b01, mixed mode)
` then you have Java installed. Great!
2. If not, you need to follow these steps:
    * Is your Ubuntu 32bit or 64bit?
    In your terminal, type `file /sbin/init`
    * Download JDK from [link](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/index.html)
    * Copy the Oracle Java binaries into the /usr/local/java directory
    * Unpack the compressed Java binaries, in the directory `/usr/local/java`
        * 32-bit Oracle Java on 32-bit Ubuntu Linux installation instructions:
        Type/Copy/Paste: `sudo tar xvzf jdk-8u20-linux-i586.tar.gz`
        * 64-bit Oracle Java on 64-bit Ubuntu Linux installation instructions:
        Type/Copy/Paste: `sudo tar xvzf jdk-8u20-linux-x64.tar.gz`
    * Edit the system PATH file /etc/profile and add the following system variables to your system path. Use nano, gedit or any other text editor, as root, open up `/etc/profile`
        * Type/Copy/Paste: `sudo gedit /etc/profile`
            or
        * Type/Copy/Paste: `sudo nano /etc/profile`
    * Scroll down to the end of the file using your arrow keys and add the following lines below to the end of your /etc/profile file:
        ```bash
        JAVA_HOME=/usr/local/java/jdk1.8.0_20
        JRE_HOME=/usr/local/java/jre1.8.0_20
        PATH=$PATH:$JRE_HOME/bin:$JAVA_HOME/bin
        export JAVA_HOME
        export JRE_HOME
        export PATH
        ```
    * Save the file and exit `ctrl + x` and `y and <EnterKey>`
    * Inform your Ubuntu Linux system where your Oracle Java JDK/JRE is located. This will tell the system that the new Oracle Java version is available for use.
        * Type/Copy/Paste: `sudo update-alternatives --install "/usr/bin/java" "java" "/usr/local/java/jdk1.8.0_20/bin/java" 1` this command notifies the system that Oracle Java JRE is available for use
        * Type/Copy/Paste: `sudo update-alternatives --install "/usr/bin/javac" "javac" "/usr/local/java/jdk1.8.0_20/bin/javac" 1` this command notifies the system that Oracle Java JDK is available for use
    * Inform your Ubuntu Linux system that Oracle Java JDK/JRE must be the default Java.
        * Type/Copy/Paste: `sudo update-alternatives --set java /usr/local/java/jdk1.8.0_20/bin/java` this command will set the java runtime environment for the system
        * Type/Copy/Paste: `sudo update-alternatives --set javac /usr/local/java/jdk1.8.0_20/bin/javac` this command will set the javac compiler for the system
    * Restart your system to load all the changes we just made

##### For Windows
1. Browse to [Oracle Java SE Downloads](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/index.html) to download the latest JDK.
2. Check the option to Accept License Agreement, and select the download file. "jdk-8u60-windows-x64.exe" in my case.
3. Run the downloaded file after download completed. And follow the steps.
4. After you've installed JDK, you have to set the system `Path` to it.
    * To set path, search "Environment Variables", click "Edit the system environment variables".
    Click on "Environment Variables..."

    * Select and edit Path
    * Add the  path of the bin folder of your JDK, `C:\Program Files\Java\jdk1.8.0_60\bin` in my case.
    * After path set, you can run `javac` in command prompt to check if java has been installed.
    * Remember to open a new command prompt to see the changes before running `javac` on it.

##### For Macs
When you install the Java Development Kit (JDK), the associated Java Runtime Environment (JRE) is installed at the same time. The JavaFX SDK and Runtime are also installed and integrated into the standard JDK directory structure.

* Depending on your processor, the downloaded file has one of the following names:
    `jdk-8uversion-macosx-amd64.dmg`
    `jdk-8uversion-macosx-x64.dmg`

    Where `version` is 6 or later.

* Download the file.
Before the file can be downloaded, you must accept the license agreement.
From either the Downloads window of the browser, or from the file browser, double click the `.dmg` file to launch it.
* A Finder window appears containing an icon of an open box and the name of the .pkg file.
* Double click the package icon to launch the Install app.
* The Install app displays the Introduction window.
Note:
- In some cases, a Destination Select window appears. This is a bug, as there is only one option available. If you see this window, select Install for all users of this computer to enable the Continue button.
- Click Continue.
- The Installation Type window appears.
- Click Install.
- If a window appears that says "Installer is trying to install new software. Type your password to allow this."
- Enter the Administrator login and password and click Install Software.
- The software is installed and a confirmation window appears.
Refer to [link](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/jdk-for-mac-readme-1564562.html) for more information about the installation. After the software is installed, delete the .dmg file if you want to save disk space.

#### Java fundamentals
_Topics like Origins of Java, What is byte-code, class file and the java compiler._
* __Origins of Java__: Java was originally called "Oak". The primary need for Java was platform-independent applications. We will learn about the platform independence of java soon. C++ needs a specific compiler for every platform where it must be run. Compiler is something that take the code that you enter and converts it into instructions for the CPU to execute. Now why can we not have the same compiler everywhere? The reason for this is constraints - a microwave controller will not have the same on-chip memory as a desktop computer. Let us just say that the memory that an `int` takes up depends on the compiler and ultimately on the available memory!

* __So does Java replace C++?__ Not really, Java was created to solve a different set of problems and C++ was created to solve some other. Both will continue to co-exist for a long time to come - being useful in their own ways.

* __Java's magic - the Bytecode!__ So what makes Java portable? Why can java programs be run on any hardware but C++ cannot? The answer to all of those questions is `Bytecode`
    - Bytecode is a highly optimized set of instructions which are executed by the Java run-time environment which is called the Java virtual machine (JVM) That is, in its standard form JVM is an interpreter for bytecode.

Surprising right? Modern programming languages like C++ have been designed to be compiled not interpreted, yet Java solves the problems of portability and security with this implementation. Thus the only thing that needs to be done differently from machine to machine is to interpret the bytecode. This JVM can easily be implemented on a variety of machines. Thus once we have the JVM in place say for your __Kindle__ then all we need is the Java byte code. The same bytecode will also run on your pebble smart watch and iPad without a problem as long as there is a JVM to handle it!

The JAVA buzzwords are:
1. Simple
2. Secure
3. Portable
4. Object-oriented
5. Robust
6. Multithreaded
7. Architecture-neutral
8. Interpreted
9. High performance
10. Distributed
11. Dynamic

__Object oriented programming__

Object oriented programming takes the best ideas of structured programming and combines them with several new concepts. Object oriented codes are organized around the data (as opposed to code)
To support object oriented programming, Java has the following three traits:
1. Encapsulation
2. Polymorphism
3. Inheritance

#### Popular JAVA IDE's
To write your Java programs, you will need a text editor. There are even more sophisticated IDEs available in the market. But for now, you can consider one of the following:

`Notepad++`: On Windows machine you can use any simple text editor like Notepad (Recommended for this tutorial), TextPad, Sublime Text or Atom.

`Netbeans`: is a Java IDE that is open-source and free which can be downloaded from http://www.netbeans.org/index.html.

`Eclipse`: is also a Java IDE developed by the eclipse open-source community and can be downloaded from http://www.eclipse.org/.


#### Hello World
```java
/** The HelloWorldProgram class implements an application that simply prints "Hello World!" to standard output.
 */
class HelloWorldProgram {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
	//Print to the console
    System.out.println("Hello World!");
 }
}
```

_The above HelloWorldProgram has primary components as,_
* __Class Definition__:

  `class HelloWorldProgram. `

  The name of the class must match the name with which the file is saved. For example in the above example the java file is saved with name HelloWorldProgram.java
  The keyword class begins the class definition for a class named HelloWorldProgram, and the code for each class appears between the opening and closing curly braces – {}.

* __Main Method__:

  In the Java programming language, every application must contain a main method whose signature is:
  `public static void main(String[] args)`

  Main method is the entry point for your application and will subsequently invoke all the other methods required by your program.
  The main method accepts a single argument (String[] args) - an array of elements of type String.

  Finally, the line:

  `System.out.println("Hello World!");`

  uses the System class from the core library to print the "Hello World!" message to standard output.

* __Comments__:

  Comments are ignored by the compiler but are useful to other programmers. The Java programming language supports three kinds of comments:

 `/* text */`

  The compiler ignores everything from /* to */.

  `/**documentation*/`

  This indicates a documentation comment (doc comment, for short). The compiler ignores this kind of comment, just like it ignores comments that use /\* and \*/.
  The javadoc tool uses doc comments when preparing automatically generated documentation. See the Javadoc™ tool documentation for more information on javadoc.

  `// text`

  The compiler ignores everything from // to the end of the line.
* __Constructors:__
  When discussing about classes, one of the most important sub topic would be constructors. Every class has a constructor. If we do not explicitly write a constructor for a class the Java compiler builds a default constructor for that class.

  Each time a new object is created, at least one constructor will be invoked. The main rule of constructors is that they should have the same name as the class. A class can have more than one constructor.

  Example of a constructor is given below:

```java
public class Puppy{
    public Puppy
    }
    public Puppy(String name){
        // This constructor has one parameter, name.
    }
}
```

Java also supports Singleton Classes where you would be able to create only one instance of a class

#### Source file declaration rules

Let us now look into the source file declaration rules. These rules are essential when declaring classes, import statements and package statements in a source file.

* There can be only one public class per source file.
* A source file can have multiple non public classes.
* The public class name should be the name of the source file as well which should be appended by .java at the end.
* If the class is defined inside a package, then the package statement should be the first statement in the source file.
* If import statements are present then they must be written between the package statement and the class declaration. If there are no package statements then the import statement should be the first line in the source file.
* Import and package statements will imply to all the classes present in the source file. It is not possible to declare different import and/or package statements to different classes in the source file.
* Classes have several access levels and there are different types of classes; abstract classes, final classes, etc.
